So yeah, I'd like to thank everyone for attending this Ask Hadley Anything, which will be for
the next half hour.
Usar is coming up with just under a month to go in Salzburg this year, and Hadley is
a presenter, so there's a chance at that event to hear more from him, but today he's here
as representing one of our sponsors that made Usar possible.
So yeah, thank you.
I guess, Hadley, could you give us a little quicker intro to yourself and our sponsor,
Puzzlet?
Yeah, sure.
Thanks, Jane.
Thanks for having me.
So as you probably know, I write a lot of R packages, and me and my team look after the
tidyverse, which is a set of packages for doing data science, and kind of the DevTools
ecosystem of packages, which help folks maintain their own packages.
So for example, one of the things I've been working on recently is Packagedown, which
is the R package that we use to make websites for our other R packages, and now many other
people use that package for their package websites too.
So Puzzlet, I work for Puzzlet, which is a PBC, or a Public Benefit Corp.
That's a little bit different to the traditional LLC.
In an LLC, the kind of overarching goal of every LLC is to maximize shareholder revenue.
That's kind of the mission of every LLC.
The idea of a PBC is to relax that and to add some goals other than just making a ton
of money.
And so the goals of Puzzlet are to really support the data science ecosystems, R and
Python, and scientific publishing in general.
So we make a lot of open source software, but we also sell commercial products.
Our main commercial products are Puzzlet Workbench, Puzzlet Connect, and Puzzlet Package
Manager, basically designed to solve problems that larger teams of R users tend to have.
So Puzzlet Workbench allows you to run RStudio or VS Code or Jupyter Notebooks on centralized
compute, which allows you to have a few big servers with a lot of computing power, or
perhaps you're in a regulated environment, and that allows you to run all your code in
an environment where everything's set up correctly.
Connect allows you to get the results of your analysis basically out of your hand and the
decision makers, whether that's by publishing Shiny apps or Dash apps or scheduled R markdowns
or sending an email with a link to a dashboard at 9 a.m. on every Friday.
And then last but not least is Puzzlet Package Manager, which basically allows your organization
to use a shared set of packages that have all the qualities that your organization might
want.
So that was a very quick overview, but I work on the open source side of Puzzlet, but tremendously
grateful for all of my colleagues who do make products.
They waste a lot of money because they pay for my salary.
Awesome, thank you.
And I guess also thanks to everyone because the questions are already coming in, but maybe
starting broad with one of our earlier questions, what, and you're not allowed to use the Puzzlet
example here, like open source project.
Have you gotten excited about recently?
I'll tell you, I've been playing around a little bit with VS Code, which is a pretty
interesting IDE or almost not exactly an IDE.
It's almost like a tool for building your own IDE, but just been playing around with
that, learning a bit about how it works.
And that's been pretty interesting.
Just a very, very popular IDE used by all sorts of developers for other languages, which
has been interesting to see what folks expect in kind of a modern IDE.
Okay, and I think that leads quite well into both a question we had before and a question
that's just popped into the chat, but there was one there around like, what is your preferred
IDE and does it change depending on what you're doing?
So examples being R package development, Python development, general data science,
the one just in the chat is Shiny, as well as things like Koto websites.
Yeah, I will say like 90% of what I do is package development.
I do like a little bit of other things, hardly any package development, but a little bit
of Shiny development, a few websites, a little bit of data science from time to time.
So I really like to kind of like stick with as much as possible with one thing so I can
really get familiar with it.
So currently that means it's sort of a mix of RStudio, which is my kind of day-to-day
driver and then BS Code, which I'm just exploring and learning from.
Thank you.
And you touched on this a little bit in your intro, but one of the questions was like today,
what are the projects that you're working on?
Yeah, so package, I'm currently getting very close to finishing off a package down release.
I think that kind of the two big features in this release are going to be having like
optional dark mode for your website.
So the users of your package website can flip between light mode and dark mode.
It's very, very popular feature on websites.
And that's a little bit more significantly as the ability to use Quarto for your
vignettes and your packages.
So traditionally, people have written their vignettes using R Markdown.
Fairly recently, CRAN has installed Quarto.
And so now you can use Quarto to write your vignettes, which brings up like all of the
nice features that Quarto have from better figure layout and easier cross-referencing
and equations and all that kind of stuff.
So bringing that to your package vignettes as well.
And that's kind of a dark art because you've got to merge the templating systems of package
down and Quarto together.
So it's certainly never going to be like 100% perfect, but I think we can get to like 95%
pretty easily and get most of the features that people care about working.
And then as people report them, we'll fix bugs and stuff.
But that should be coming very, very, very soon.
Thank you.
And there was a question come in, which I think maybe touches a little bit on, I can't
remember if it was your workshop or your talk, but someone said that they recently saw a
video where you showed an example of web scraping and GitHub automation.
And they asked, is there a possible use to use GitHub to automatically render multiple
Quarto documents to PDF and HTML and upload them to a server?
Yeah, absolutely.
I can just show you, let's see, I think I managed to get this working like five seconds
before, that's cool.
So let me see if I can get that page.
Well, let's put the link in the chat anyway.
Hopefully it will be working later, but I was just playing around with this today.
Now, Crayon just released, they're now making it more clear which packages are possibly
scheduled for removal if they haven't fixed problems.
So I've been working just to turn that into like a little dashboard that gets automatically
updated every day by GitHub Action.
So I seem to have missed some steps, so the action is working, but I can't see where it
is publishing.
But anyway, I think this sort of...
Why is that not working?
We're making you do something, a live demo.
But this sort of thing, I think where you schedule a GitHub Action or something similar
to do something and then publish it somewhere is like super, super useful, super powerful.
And like basically you can do it today, it's just not terribly well documented.
So one of the things I've been sort of thinking more generally about lately is this issue
of like, how do you effectively use R in production?
And to me, production, like the two, I think, big things that make putting R or putting
anything in production challenging is that you've got to run your code is now being run
like regularly and it's being run on another computer.
So I'm trying to do more and more of these things in GitHub Actions, these regular things
just to better learn, like how can you write code that is both more reliable and when it
fails, gives you more actionable insights.
So hopefully I'll get this particular one working.
And then as I set up a few more of them, I have to kind of start to document that process
a bit better so other people can copy it.
Another thing I did sort of along a similar lines, probably the video you saw was there
was an artist I follow on TikTok and every time he sold his work, it was always sold
out by the time I found out about it.
So I wrote a little script to Scraper's website every three hours and then send a push notification
to my phone whenever it changed so that I could finally buy some of the art.
So I think there's a lot of cool little things you can do with GitHub Actions in that way.
And I want to try and make this accessible to more people.
And then maybe changing tack a little bit, I'm attacking a little bit, but there's one
question here around how does PositBalance having packages that they continue to support,
like all the ones in the tidyverse, without the effort to keep these packages supported,
not leaving capacity to do anything new?
Yeah, I mean, that's a really tough challenge.
And I think the other aspect of this that we're starting to learn about is that most
people tend to get sick of maintaining the same package after somewhere between five
and 10 years.
So that's kind of happened.
Let's sort of have what's happened with me and ggplot2, I love it, it's still close to
my heart, but after so many years, you just want to do something else.
And so the original strategy was to hire, well, the original fix was to hire Thomas
Peterson to maintain it.
And now he's getting sick of maintaining it.
And so obviously hiring a new person every time is not a terribly scalable strategy.
So I think, I don't know, I don't have any great insights here.
I think one of the things we're trying to be more clear about in the tidyverse is just
our development cadence and how many packages most of the time are just kind of lying in
this fallow state.
We will keep them on CRAN, we will fix any kind of critical bugs that we come across,
but they're mostly just kind of lying there, accumulating issues until we notice, oh,
hey, there's a couple of weeks worth on this package, and then we'll come back to it.
But I think in general, the thing that is tough is saying no to people.
And I think we have gotten better at that a bit in terms of just being like, hey, this
is a cool idea.
We'd love to do it, but we just don't have the time and we're probably never going to
have the time.
And so closing issues down for that reason, which kind of sucks.
But we have to carve out the time and the energy to work on new stuff as well as maintaining
old stuff.
So that's the bummer.
OK.
And there's one question here specifically about BSlib.
And so the person's mentioning that it's becoming a one-stop shop for Shiny dashboard
development.
But what additional functionality would you like to see added to the package?
Yeah, I don't have...
I use BSlib mostly in kind of weird or unusual ways because I'm using it for like package
down or for other bits and pieces.
I think most recently been exploring the idea of adding like a gallery page to package down
sites that use BSlib cards.
And that, I don't know, that always seems to work pretty well.
It's definitely a little...
I think that's the challenge I have with BSlib is it's often hard to figure out.
Like you've got to kind of cross-reference the BSlib docs or the Bootstrap docs to figure
out if there's something specific that you're trying to achieve.
Sometimes it's just easier to write the HTML yourself.
So I don't know.
I don't have any...
Yeah, I don't have anything.
I don't feel particularly limited by BSlib just because you can always go out and write
the HTML yourself if you want.
And there were a few questions kind of asking for updates on specific topics.
So maybe looking across ggviz, Mastering Shiny, and also dbply.
I guess, is there anything hot off the news or coming for those three projects?
Yeah, ggviz is definitely unlikely that we'll see another upgrade.
But Thomas is starting to think about kind of what the future of graphics should look like.
And it's not kind of super clear exactly what that should be and how that ties in
with web graphics and reactivity.
But he's starting to do a bunch of projects to kind of explore that.
So nothing in the near future, but definitely something that he's going to think more about.
Mastering Shiny, I don't have any current plans to update it.
But we've talked about doing like a translation of Mastering Shiny to Python.
I think that's probably more likely to happen first, just as we try and help Python folks
master Shiny as well.
And then dbply, I don't know, it's just like a steady...
I think dbply seems to be like a pretty important package for a lot of people.
And we'll just continue to see like a steady stream of fixes and improvements.
I'm really grateful that dbply now has another maintainer, Maximillian
who has been contributing a lot of the fixes lately.
So it's been really great to have someone else thinking about it and caring about it.
So there's definitely a package, it's just a long tail of small issues and just like
grinding down all these minor SQL translation problems.
I think the only thing that I'll be kind of like specifically
kind of pitching in on that in the database ecosystem at the moment is just around integration
with our partners.
Both of us now partnering with Databricks and Snowflake and just doing anything I can
do on the open source side to make sure if you are using Databricks or Snowflake that
everything just like works seamlessly and painlessly from our studio and from our packages.
You don't have to like fretting about all the various different things,
just works and like disappears into the background.
Okay.
And as you mentioned the potential translation for the Python community,
there's a couple of questions in that space.
I think one I liked the wording, the way it was worded was
what type of topics you discuss when you have a work meeting with Wes McKinney?
Yeah, I think a lot of what we discussed is how to make R and Python work better together.
And I think that's kind of a story there is the same as it's been for quite a long time.
It's just like a lot of stuff that you don't want to write in R or Python,
you want to write in like C or C++ or Rust or some other high performance programming language.
And then on top of that, you build a nice user interface in R or Python.
I think like we've seen that with like DuckDB,
we've seen that with like some interesting work in Polars.
It's just, I don't know, like a reticulate package in R makes that easier to talk between the two.
The Arrow project, the sharing data across them, that just feels, I don't know, like in some way,
it feels to me like it's just getting easier and easier to collaborate across these boundaries.
One thing that Gabor Ciardi and my team did recently was write a little package for reading
parquet files into R. You can certainly do that with Arrow, but Arrow is like a big heavy
dependency. This is like, I think we call it a nano parquet. It is a very, very lightweight
package, but it just makes it easier to use this pretty standard file format in R if you're
working with smaller datasets as well. So it's kind of continuing to look for opportunities to
collaborate across language boundaries. Okay. And there was another question which was worded,
how do you see the role of R and its ecosystem evolving to meet the growing number of data
scientists that also know generic Python languages like Python? And I guess maybe you've
talked a little bit about the interoperability, but do you think R and R scope and with the focus
of R and its ecosystem would be impacted by the introduction of more Python or?
Yeah. I mean, it's interesting because Python is legitimately the most popular programming
language on the planet right now, incredibly powerful general purpose tool. And there's
obviously a lot of advantages to having one tool that you turn to for every problem you
could possibly imagine. And that's Python. But there's also advantages to working with tools
that specialize for the problem at hand. Because Python, there's just no way that in Python,
you're ever going to be able to, I think, interact with data as fluidly as you can with R because of
the way that missing values are built into the language because of the way non-standard evaluation
works and R allows us to write interfaces like ggplot2 and dplyr. Yeah, sure, the R community
is smaller and there's lots of things that R can't do that Python can do. But I don't know.
I think at the end of the day, we can have general purpose tools and we can have special purpose
tools. And I love R and I have no intention of stopping developing.
And then there's one here. We talked a little bit about working with constraints on resources.
There's a question here about in a hypothetical scenario where you had unlimited resources,
is there a project that you would even want to start or revive?
I think one of the projects that's really interesting to me is these tools for
gradual typing where you add types to a programming language. TypeScript's a good example of this or
Pydandic's kind of in this space too, where the advantage of adding types being very
strict for every function about what sorts of inputs it can take and what sort of outputs it
produces, it leads to better documentation, leads to better error messages, and potentially
leads to much better performance. But languages with strict type systems are pretty far away from
R. But I think there's been interesting research lately and how you can kind of gradually add
types into more dynamic languages. That would be a big project. It's kind of hard to tell
what the payouts would be in the long run, but I think that would be something I would love to
invest more on and just figure out how we can make our programs both safer and faster and
more informative when they error. Thank you. I guess it wouldn't be a Q&A in 2024 without a LLM
question. There's one here on, what's your opinion on the future of data science
during the era of tools like, they mentioned ChatGBT, but I guess there's also GitHub Copilot
and similar IDE-based tools. Yeah, I find it very hard to imagine that you can replace a
data scientist with anything less than kind of full-on generalized AI, because you have to bring
so much domain knowledge and expertise to any problem apart from just writing code.
But I do think that LLMs are going to have a pretty transformative impact on the way that we
write code. And certainly, I think it seems like it fundamentally changes how we might teach
programming, because now you can express yourself in English or whatever, express yourself in a
human language and get pretty reasonable code a lot of the time generated. I use Copilot. I've
found it really interesting and useful, particularly at doing tedious tasks or changing
things between two different structures. It seems to be pretty good at figuring out,
guessing the old structure and the new structure, and then prompting me. So there's things that
kind of routine bits of programming that I found it really helpful for. I think in general,
it's really good at that kind of lower level, like pretty good at that lower level. Sometimes
it just does a lot of things. But it doesn't, I don't know, I don't think it provides much sense
of direction. So there still really needs to be that human in the loop, steering the direction
and thinking about the bigger picture and what's the overall goal. And I think we're a very long
way away from having LLMs to solve that gap. I think LLMs are really, really good at solving
problems that have been solved a ton of times before, because it can just average out over all
of those problems that are seen on the internet, the things that have never been done before. It's
just clearly not as good. And I guess I'm very skeptical that we can kind of bootstrap genuine
inferential capabilities just by throwing more and more data at it.
Maybe setting this on one of my own questions. So like,
for people like yourself and those at Posit that are professional package maintainers and
developers, do you find the code completions, I guess, if you have code completions enabled,
does any of that get, you know, you tab it in? Or is it something where it's not using the correct
style or it's not referencing? I'm just interested if it's the code completions.
I'm tabbing it in quite a lot. But again, I've noticed it's really good. If I'm going to write
for a function, I've written the documentation and now I want to check that each argument is the
correct type. And once I've done the first two arguments, it's pretty good at just stepping
through all the other arguments and guessing what function I want to call to check its type.
So it's stuff like that where it's like, I would have figured that out. It wouldn't have taken me
that long to type it. But now I can just press tab and complete the whole thing instead of having to
think about it. Sometimes that's a good thing. And sometimes it's a bad thing because you just,
it's easy. It's also easy for subtle mistakes to creep in that way because you didn't really
think about it. You didn't really read it. So there's definitely also a cost of just
tabbing in larger blocks of code because sometimes the effort of understanding exactly what you just
did is greater than the cost of writing it yourself. But I'm definitely noticing I'm
kind of relying on it more. And even if it gets half the suggestion right, it's still
useful to tab that out and then delete and change the rest of it.
Okay. And so we have some questions that we won't be able to get to here. So I'll try to follow up,
especially the ones that are asking questions about Posit products. So we can maybe get some
help from the Posit team there. There's one here though, I guess from someone quite passionate to
know, if they want to become, so they're asking about becoming a data scientist at Posit. So I
guess my first question is, does that exist? And then just generally, if you did want to become an
engineer at Posit, what makes a Positier or whatever Posit calls themselves?
Yeah. So we do have a data science team. It's pretty small. I think it's about four people
currently and it's pretty small and it's pretty scrappy. And I will say my experience as a data
science team at Posit has exactly the same problems that small data science teams have
at every single company where they exist. It's challenging to get high quality data.
It's challenging to create dashboards that yield actionable insights that don't have
various execs trying to change things all the time. So I think because we have a small data
science team, if you want to be a data scientist at Posit, you have to be strong and
you've got to be able to act pretty independently and know a little bit about
all the parts of the data science pipeline. You're likely to be doing a little bit of data
engineering. You're going to be writing some R code. You're going to be writing shiny apps. You'll
be writing dashboards. You've got to have the full stack of experience there.
And engineering more broadly, like on the open source side, we're looking for people
that are generally contributed to the R ecosystem already, present on GitHub. And it's certainly
very easy. It's much easier to hire people that we have interacted with positively in the past
because we know you're going to be a good fit with the team already. But we also have a bunch
of just general engineers who are, I think if you read the R community, like Posit is a company
that you know and hopefully respect. And the broader developer ecosystem, Posit is just like
a tiny company amongst thousands of other companies. And it's a totally different ballgame
hiring just general engineers because most of them don't know about Posit at all or what we're
trying to do. And there I think it's just about the kind of general programming skills and having
some interest in data science. And maybe just to close us out, there's a question from Sierra here
about if you know R and you want to take the step of getting involved in an open source project,
I guess do you have any tips there for someone who's never contributed to someone else's code
in an open source setting before? Yeah, I think my advice is to like start small and get
accustomed to kind of the technical process of like how do you make a pull request on GitHub.
And the easiest way to do that is just like proofread documentation because I'm terrible
at proofreading and like whatever I'm working on recently I'm sure you can find it's like
ridiculous small errors. Like that's not, you know, it's a useful contribution. It's not,
you know, it's not amazingly valuable but that allows you to kind of get over that first hurdle
of like how do I actually do all this stuff? What are the mechanics of creating a patch and submitting
it to GitHub? So I really recommend that approach and then as you get like comfortable with that you
can start to maybe look at some of the issues and try and create reprixes and then maybe start
looking at the code a little bit yourself. Another great opportunity if you happen to be coming to
PositConf in September and August or you live in Seattle, we have a Tidyverse Developer Day
coming up which is just a day where, I'll put the link in the chat,
the chat, where you can just come and try out that process in a very friendly supportive
environment with tons of helpers around. So if you are interested and you can make it I'd say
that's 100% the best way. Otherwise, you know, start small, figure out the mechanics of GitHub
and then start trying to tackle some of the simpler issues. Cool, well yeah, thank you for
your time and as I mentioned those questions we have around things like PositAcademy that we'll
follow up with in an email. But yeah, thank you for your time Hadley and I'm looking forward to
seeing your workshop and hearing you talk next month in Salzburg.
Yeah, awesome, thanks James, thanks Edwin, thanks for coming everyone.